Judy Heumann, who has
been called the mother of the disability rights movement,
has died at the age of 75. President Biden, in the
statement noting her passing, called her a, quote, "trailblazer; a rolling warrior
for disability rights in america." Heumann, who lost her ability 
to walk at age two after contracting polio,
lobbied for legislation that led to the passage
of the landmark Americans with
Disabilities Act. Tonight we hear her in her
own words, as we revisit her brief, but
spectacular, take on the disability rights movement. When I was five years old, in Brooklyn, New York,
on East 38 Street, my mother did 
what every other parent did when
their kid was five. She took me to
school to register me. And this was in
the early 1950s. There were no
motorized wheelchairs. So she pushed me to school
and it wasn't accessible. She pulled me up the steps. And, um, the principal
said I couldn't go to school because
I was a fire hazard. I don't really know that
there was an explanation. It just was. I think the average
person, they see disability as a threat, as a
threat to not being able to do things as people
have typically done them. And I think
there's truth in that, but the question is, is it
because one has a disability, or because society
itself has constructed itself in such a way
because they haven't seen us. Discrimination against
disabled people has existed from
the beginning of time. And we're in a place
right now where because of other movements,
Civil Rights movement, the women's movement, the
Black Lives Matter movement, et cetera, people are
speaking up and out. One of the first pieces of
legislation that the disability community really engaged in was
getting regulations developed for a provision of law
called Section 504. Section 504 says you can't
discriminate against someone who has a disability
if the entity is receiving money from the
federal government. It was the first
time that many of these young
disabled people felt a part of something
and really felt that they were
making a difference, not only for their lives but
for the lives of many others. There is a shift, I
believe, going on in our society where
we're looking at race, and gender,
equality, and disability, as issues that we
need to address, that diversity is something
that makes our companies stronger,
that diverse businesses provide better
services for customers. I also am a very
big believer that the disability rights community
cannot stand on its own, we need
to be working with all other movements
and we want all other movements to be
inclusive of disabled people. If we are actively learning
and working together, we can do things 
like make sure when housing
is being built in our communities
that it's accessible. Not just for people who have
physical disabilities today, but if you're going to have a
physical disability tomorrow. I think having a
disability really has allowed me to
do and get in touch with so many things
and opportunities that otherwise would
not have happened. People look at us as
the label of our disability. And it is a part of who we are. But it is not who we are. My name is Judy Heumann. And this is my
brief but spectacular take on the disability
rights movement. Hers was a life that
made a difference. Absolutely. She will be missed.