[somber music] [Robert Kennedy]
I visited the state institutions 
for the mentally retarded And I think, particularly at Willowbrook,
that we have a situation that borders on a, a snake pit,
and that the children live in filth. I think all of us are at fault and, uh, I think it's just long overdue
that something be done about it. How long have you
been at Willowbrook? [Bernard]
18 years. How is it living
on the ward that you live? Disgrace. The attendants are trying their
best, but the staff is just too small to do anything more than
just try and keep the place clean. When there's only one
person to take care of 30 or 40, nothing good
can possibly happen. No rehabilitation,
no training, nothing. The attendants are
as much the victim of the conditions here
as the patients are. My problem with
telling this story 50 years later is that
I'm like Pavlov's dog. I, I react and I get flashed
back to that, to the obscene, the torture of the
residents, the inmates there. Something so utterly terrible
that it was almost unbelievable. This was a secret enclave. The system had set up a way that
would not allow any ordinary people to see what was going
on inside these brick buildings. I was given this key
on that first day of work. Pretty heavy steel
key that you can see. I was told to go to
a certain building and I went there and
I opened one door. It was a very heavy metal door. Turned the key, opened it. And I walked a couple of steps
and I had to open a second door. I was directed down
to the end of the hall. There was another steel door. At 19 years of age,
I basically said to myself, hmm, what
have I gotten myself into? Who is locked behind
three steel doors? Pushed the door open,
and when I walked in, on the other side of the
door were 40 toddlers. And why in God's name were they
locked behind three steel doors? When I applied for my job,
I was really never taken to any of the wards. They just accepted
my application and they told me
when I would start. And then I went to building six,
which was my building. And the building supervisor
opened the door to the day room and
there was the chaos. you have no idea
what was inside. No idea the savagery,
the squalor, the illness, the infectiousness, the violence
that was just the norm every day. It had a stink
to it that got into your clothes and into your skin. How unattended it was hell on earth, why
would you continue to allow people to
share a bath bathrooms with no doors on
the stalls when you know a hundred
percent of them get hepatitis within six
months of entering and and when the
incidence of intestinal parasites and
worms was incredibly high. When they used to give
out cookies and candy, They used to throw
it on the floor and they would all get
down and grab at it. I mean, I never even, I
never told nobody that. It happened, it happened. Mind you, this is
only 50 years ago that we're not talking
about the Dark Ages. We are still responsible. We're not talking about
great grandparents and, you know, ancient history. This is our world. Our universe, this happened
in our universe, on our watch. It's mind-blowing. Well, Willowbrook has a long
history, obviously, on this site. It actually was first
chartered 75 years ago. And in the charter, it was
described as a school for the education of what they then
termed mental defectives. What we now would say
probably would be people with intellectual or
developmental disabilities. So it started out with
this goal of educating and training people and much of
the coverage that you might see in the newspapers then
was designed to encourage people to see this as a
good option for their children. But very quickly
through underfunding and understaffing it became
really quite unlivable. At its height it had about three
times as many people living in its wards as the place was
designed to accommodate. I would get calls,
for example, at the beginning that say to me, 
"somebody's acting out. You need to sign a
straitjacket order or you need to sign a Thorazine
shot to cool them down." And I didn't understand
what was going on here at first. Really, it was, it took
me a, a year to really see and figure out the evil, 
you know, the relentless cruelty
that was built into the system to
maintain the status quo. Lack of privacy and 
that many of the people were, at that time, 
because of the budget cuts, there weren't enough changes
of clothing to go around so there was nudity,
chaos. Nobody, nobody came into these buildings!
Not the director of this place, nobody came
into those buildings. they were sealed off, you know,
as, as coffins. They were, they were living coffins
for devalued people. I am the younger sister of a
previous resident of Willowbrook who lived here for 10 years
before he died in 1968. He actually became a bit of a
family secret I was told that I didn't visit because I didn't
want to go at the age of 3. I believe my mother
never went because it was too painful.
Doctors, social workers, and the belief at
that time was in a situation like this,
your best bet is to drop your child
off and they will get cared for and to
move on with your life and that is what my
parents tried to do. My mother never, ever
forgave herself. Ever. When you worked here, if you
continued to work here, you started to have, you had to become a little
bit impervious, you had to be able to deal with this. I always
say that we became a little bit institutionalized because
this was such a surreal thing but if I left, who's going to come? I mean, I felt I
could do something. Maybe I could change what
was happening on a daily basis. My brother died, um, 
on July 4th, 1968. I was always under
the impression that his death was due to
some type of trauma. Um, he, what I was
told subsequently was that he had um
perforated his stomach and the assumption was
based upon what i had learned in secrecy
by reading, you know, bits and pieces was
that he probably had been, um, either
abused by caregivers or that there had been
some kind of traumatic event, you know,
with another resident. I was just a year older
than my brother, Luis Rivera, who was placed in
Willowbrook State School at the age of five. 
My mother would undress my brother as a way of assessing, 
was he gaining weight? Were there any bruises? 
Were there any marks? That's how families
tried to monitor the care because we weren't 
allowed to ask any questions. My little girl was, was, uh,
two years old and we never knew where
the children slept, or who fed them.
The first visit, I had to cut her hair
because it was matted. The director sent
me a letter and told me if I didn't like
it, then take her out. So I got on the
bus that next day. I came out to Willowbrook. I sat there all day long. Until about 4 o'clock, secretary say, we closing
now, you got to leave. I said, I'm not going anyplace. He finally, he decided
to meet with me. He didn't even look up at me. I said, well, get
someone to take a letter, I'll sign it,
I'll take her out. I said, before I take her out,
I'm gonna call the news media. And that's when he asked
me, did I want a cup of coffee? [chuckling] Thus the beginnings of advocacy. Before Geraldo
Rivera's expose, there was a young reporter,
Jane Curtin, who went to Willowbrook
and actually did a series of articles
exposing the conditions. She was joined by Eric Aerts who
was a photojournalist who took some powerful photographs of
the horrific conditions there. So Jane really was the
first to really bring public awareness to what was
happening at Willowbrook. I got to know then, Mike
Wilkins and Bill Bronston. They contacted
me and told me that there was something
that I should see. that they thought that I
would be able to write about it. They had faith, I think,
in my perspective on things. They walked me
through the front door. I mean, I was with people who
were taking chances, but there had been no prior exposure,
so there were no alarm bells. So it was just three people
going through, through the front door. Nobody really believed
it. When Jane Kurtin did her articles in the
Staten Island Advance, there were a couple
of still photos, but, uh, still, no, nobody believed
it and we were sort of, we were being
denounced from pulpits and and other politicians
not believing us and they were thinking we were
just radicals bad-mouthing an institution that
was doing its best. The first thing I began
to do was to bring the families inside to show
them why their kids were being destroyed, why every time
they come, their kid would be more and more damaged,
more and more injured. Bill Broster and I quickly
observed and concluded that, uh, The most progressive,
uh, element in that institution
was the parents. That led to meetings
where I began to set up seminars
for the families in order to understand why they had to get their
kids out of here. The parents got involved,
they got organized, they got confident because their
meetings were really big. We had a meeting one Sunday
with a large group of parents. The director, Dr. Jack
Hammond, was invited. He was asked to take a
public stand against the conditions where there
weren't enough clothes, there wasn't enough staff. He refused. He said, "I've been
in this business for a long time
and it won't work." They ejected him from
the meeting at that point. Um, and that was a Sunday and
that following Monday, there was a memorandum circulated through
the institution saying that no employee was allowed to attend a meeting of the
parents organization. But the next Sunday, I did attend
and so did, I'm sure, so did Bill. Um, and then we were
promptly given our pink slips. The supervisor in building six,
uh, a nice guy, but it was his job to hand me my pink
slip and tell me I was fired and I
was pretty stunned. And his hand was
shaking, uh, and in his anxiety forgot to
ask for the key. And I didn't
remember that I had it. So I got home and there it was. And so, of course, it
made me think because one of my thoughts was,
man, if people just knew if they just knew about
this place and could see it for themselves, nobody
would put up with it. And so I slept on it. And the next day
I called Geraldo. I happen to know
him from before. Well Mike called me
at one point and said that he had just been
fired from Willowbrook and I said "what's
Willowbrook?" It sounded so nice, that lyrical
name, the Willowbrook. I thought it was like a
country club. He said he had just been fired
and that the conditions there were so
appalling that he thought it would be a great
story for us to tell. And I listened, I had
no experience at all with either
institutions or with the developmentally
disabled so I was utterly unprepared for the
reality of Willowbrook. I was horrified. I was appalled. It was, it was beyond belief how, 
how horrible it was, how filthy it was. It was hell on earth. It was really, I mean I was an experienced person, you
know, very urban, very savvy did all kinds of, you know,
drug abuse stories and you know, I was a tough guy
but when I saw Willowbrook it was it was something
that seared my soul. The administrators had a colder academic, excusing
it away as thinking that we were naive,
that there was something that we were missing. And I think that my ignorance
was my strength in the sense that I looked and I
said, "are you kidding me?" I mean, you have
children unattended and smeared with
their own feces and wailing under the
sinks, their pants down around their
ankles, eating slop. I mean, what is it that
they don't understand? The conditions are
getting worse every time they cut the
budget more and more. I got back to the Eyewitness
newsroom and there were a barrage of calls from New
York State officials, uh, angrily denouncing our trespassing
and threatening lawsuits and without authorization violated
the privacy of the residents. But there's no privacy anyway. There was no privacy
anyway, very eloquently stated. They lived, you know,
everything all communal. So to his credit, Al Primo, the
director of Eyewitness News and the assignment editors said,
okay, they suspended judgment. The film came back from the lab. They saw the film. Everyone's spine stiffened,
and they said, we're going
to go with this story. It changed the world. But even Bernard with his
tragically eloquent plea for help doesn't really understand
that what Willowbrook needs isn't more money. 
More money would certainly help. At least the kids would
have clothes and they'd be cleaner than they are now,
but they'd still basically we have to change the way
we care for our mentally retarded. We ask for change, 
we demand change. The question was, what
was the solution to this place? They wanted to
fix it, of course. They wanted to pour another few millions of dollars
into this place because they didn't have another alternative paradigm
in their head. And our job was
to stop them from fixing this place
and to shut it down. We went in to the
federal court in order to try and get an
emergency intervention. The lawyers brought in the top leaders in the
United States to talk about what quality services for people with special
needs look like. Their testimony
was just amazing. It was the first time
that the reality of habilitation services,
of individualized, developmental services, was
articulated in a court situation. And so as the trial went
on, finally, the judge decided to get up off of his bench
and come and take a look. And that closed the deal. Once he saw it, once he walked
through it, no matter what they did to clean it up,
and they tried to clean it up. The expose really
led to major changes in the disability system
in this country, and various laws were passed
which were designed to protect people
with disabilities. In 1975 alone, three
significant laws were enacted. Leading up to the passage
of the Civil Rights for Institutionalized Persons
Act, which protects the rights of people with disabilities
in institutional facilities followed by the official
closure of Willowbrook in 1987, paving the way for the Americans with Disabilities
Act in 1990. Did I take you back into
Willowbrook? I never went back. You never went back, yeah.
I, I, I wish that I never did. [soft music] So after Bernard left Willowbrook,
he went on to become a civil rights activist for people 
with developmental disabilities, and really was a
driving force behind the creation of the 
Statewide Self-Advocacy Association of New York State, 
or SANYS, as it's called. So he went on to do some great things after he
left Willowbrook. We're not there yet, 
but we're getting there, with all the advocacy, 
parents advocacy, self advocates, 
um, and SANYS. And because of Bernard Canbello,
it all started because of him. And we're grateful. You know, we got
a long way to go. This is gonna go on forever. Until we change
our attitude about people with
developmental disabilities. Bernard is, he went on to
have a career in advocacy. Where would he have been if he'd
never met Wilkins and Bronston? He became a symbol.
A symbol of potential realized. Willowbrook affected
the entire world. It is the, it is the ground zero
for disability rights. What I saw in my brother
was a desire to live, a desire to experience
the world as we know it, that was deprived and
denied of him by virtue of the institutionalization
that he was subject to. I think it's also important
to remember that there were probably thousands of
children who never survived being here and they need
to be remembered too. The cost is a human
cost and being robbed of that
potential in one's life is just a tragedy we would
never want to see repeated again. There's no way to go ahead
without remembering what happened in the past
because it gives us direction. It tells us we have
learned this lesson. There's a duality for
me with Willowbrook. I think back about some of the
saddest things that I saw here. And then I think about the
fact that this little boy, Josh, that learned to walk when he
was eight only because there was no one helping him, that
he took his first steps to me. And when you grow up in an
institution, we stunt that, that curiosity. So I think about the
sadness of it, but I think about Josh walking towards
me and how that filled me. Those images that
we saw in Geraldo Rivera's exposé or
in the photographs by Eric Aerts that
appeared in the Staten Island Advance, the
images that make us hurt, that's not that
whole person. That is that person in
that historical moment. it's important to
remember that these are people with
voices and dreams and hopes. The very first
word that comes to mind is the one
that came to mind for decades which is shame. 
Um, for me it was a source of great shame
that this happened to um, to my brother. Um, over the
years and especially now, um, there's, I don't really
feel shame anymore. I actually, um, especially today, I'm extremely grateful. I'm just grateful for, um,
the work that was done by Geraldo Rivera, 
by the, um, activist physicians and parents
and unfortunately, my family did not
benefit from that. It was too late for us, but
not too late for so many others. When the doctors
called me, 50 years ago, to tell me of this expose
that needed airing on television, Jane Kurtin's fine work
at The Advance, to advance that story... Of course I had no idea
that 50 years later 35 years after the closing 
of this terrible institution, we would
be gathered here celebrating the
progress guarding against deterioration and
budget cuts and so forth. But the world has changed for
the developmentally disabled. [applause]
They have come out of the shadows. One, two, three! [cheering and applause] The ribbon cutting today of
opening the mile is a formal action of remembering
the past to protect the future. For now, it's about people
walking on this mile, walking on this property,
and starting to really critically think and take steps and
they can take personal actions to make sure that
this never happens again. Be the change that
you want to see. That's exciting to me to see
what has been built on the ashes of that, the phoenix
that has risen from those ashes. And that's the legacy. [inspirational music plays]