Now I personally am
pretty new to the world of autistic advocacy, so it
surprised me when I felt so strongly about a certain
debate, that is, the question of person-first versus
identity-first language. This debate normally takes
place between autism parents, that is, parents of autistic
children, and autistic adults. Today I want to explain
to you why I vastly prefer autistic person
over person with autism. [playful music] Hi everyone, and welcome
back to my channel. For those of you who don't
know me, I am Sam, and I make videos about autism and
neurodiversity every single week. Person-first language has
its origins in AIDS activism in the 1980s, where a group
called the People with AIDS Self-Empowerment Movement
attempted to distance themselves from certain language, such
as the words victim or patient. This language has
spread throughout other advocacy
groups related to chronic health conditions,
such as diabetes or asthma, and
certain disabilities. The reasoning behind
it is that people don't want to be referred to
as the diabetic patient. They want to be
seen as a person first and foremost by
medical professionals. And I really don't
have a problem with that when it comes
to conditions like those but I also
think that it should be the communities
themselves that decide. Autism is unique in a way
because as a childhood and developmental condition,
there is a whole other category of people that are put
between the patients and the healthcare professionals
and that is the parents. Now, I don't want to generalize
too much, but autism parents tend to be the strongest advocates
for person-first language. They don't have
an autistic child, they have a child with autism. They love their
child, but hate autism. They want to fight
or beat autism. Don't believe me? Try typing in autism to
any t-shirt printing site. You'll be amazed
at what comes up. So in advocating for their
children, they all too often advocate against autism
and the autistic experience. From their
perspective, autism is something that
is like a disease, something that is entirely separate
from their child's identity. And nothing to be
celebrated but something to be considered a burden, on
the child and on themselves. As an autistic adult
who is only just starting to realise how ingrained
autism is in my head, This really borders
on kind of offensive. To take the autism out of
Yo Samdy Sam would be to remove everything
that makes me, me. And replacing that with
a neurotypical way of thinking would make me
somebody else entirely. Don't let the
autism define you is a phrase that can
only possibly be uttered by somebody 
who doesn't have to live in this
head every day. Of course it doesn't
just define me, it is a descriptor of the
way my brain works. My ability to focus on
very, very small details, for example, can be a
burden sometimes, but I can no less turn it off
than you can stop yourself seeing without physically
closing your eyes. Autism doesn't
define me, it is me. But I should point
out, not all autistic people feel so
strongly about this. And some may
disagree entirely, and that's totally within
their rights to. This is just my humble
opinion on the matter. That's also not to
say I've never used person with autism
or people with autism if it made better
sense linguistically or just sounded
better in conversation. But I'm not gonna 
get annoyed if someone says it in
casual conversation. This is not about
grammar policing. It's more about the people
who correct other people and insist on people using person-first
language in every case. To me it just sounds so
awkward like this, like you are falling over yourself
to be "politically correct." And to be honest, it kind of
makes us stick out and others us. Talking around the word you
really want to use in such an obvious way makes it sound
like it's an insult or a slur. or otherwise something
to be ashamed of or avoid mentioning
as much as possible. It is not more polite to avoid
calling me what I actually am. But the real threat, in my opinion,
comes from the organizations who use it as an attempt to
pathologize us and our neurology. Because person-first
language separates the autism from the
person, by definition, It opens the door to
treatments, cures, or worse. What's next, gene
editing to eliminate autism? That's not just a bad dream,
you know, it's already started. Language is important. The English language
is a haven of subtlety and nuance, which
can be quite opaque to those whose
first language is not English, or in fact,
to autistic people. I can imagine people
from other countries watching, thinking,
what's the big deal? It sounds the same to me. But take it from
a native English speaker, there is
a difference on this. It's a subtle one,
but it is there. Now I don't in any way intend to
shame or belittle anyone who's used this kind of language in
the past with good intentions. This was more of a
consciousness-raising video to gently let you know that, like, hey,
we don't all really like that. So this autistic
autist is going to ever so autistically
say goodbye now. I hope you enjoyed the
video and it made you think. If you want to keep
watching my stuff on autism or neurodiversity,
there's a playlist right here. And thanks for watching
and I will see you next time.